README.md, before:

# Trip Tracker Backend

GO Version: 1.23.5

This backend application is written in Go and provides API endpoints for managing trips. The backend uses the built-in `net/http` package for handling HTTP requests and maintains a map of trips in memory.

## Resources

We use the aviationstack API for real time flight/airport information [Check their site here](https://aviationstack.com)

[API Docs](https://aviationstack.com/documentation)

---

## Prerequisites

1. **Go Installed**: Ensure Go is installed on your system. You can download it from [here](https://golang.org/dl/).

   - Verify installation:
     ```bash
     go version
     ```

2. **Environment**: You can set an optional `PORT` environment variable to specify the port number on which the backend will run.

---

## Database

I use sqlite for this project

### Installation

Assuming you're working on an Ubuntu 22.04, but this process is similar for most OS cases.

```bash
sudo apt update
```

```bash
sudo apt install sqlite3
```

Verify the installation

```bash
sqlite3 --version
```

Creates the shell and new database. I like to put this under the database folder

```bash
sqlite3 database.db
```

## Installing Tailwind

To generate the Tailwind style sheet, we use the Tailwind binary. To get started with TailWind CSS, make sure you have the correct binary in the root directory. follow the instructions in this guide. Make sure you download the correct binary for your operating system. https://tailwindcss.com/blog/standalone-cli

Generating the output.css file

```bash
./tailwindcss -i ./static/css/input.css -o ./static/css/output.css --watch
```

Add the href to the templ files

```html
<head>
  <meta charset="UTF-8" />
  <meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1.0" />
  <title>My Trips</title>
  <script src="/static/js/htmx.min.js"></script>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="/static/css/output.css" />
</head>
```

## Installing Templ

https://templ.guide/

Generate the files via

```bash
templ generate
```

## Installing Air

Air is useful to autoload and track your go code

https://github.com/cosmtrek/air

Refere to [Here](https://github.com/air-verse/air) for reference

First, init air if not already doe

```bash
air init
```

That wil create the .air.toml file. Then just run the air command.

```bash
air
```

## HTMX Example

```html
<button hx-get="/trips" hx-target="#trip-list" hx-swap="innerHTML">
  Load Trips
</button>

<div id="trip-list">
  <ul>
    for _, trip := range trips {
    <li>{ trip.Airline }</li>
    }
  </ul>
</div>
```

## How to Run the Backend

1. **Clone the Repository**:

   ```bash
   git clone <repository_url>
   cd trip-tracker/backend
   ```

2. **Initialize Go Modules**:
   If the `go.mod` file is missing, initialize the Go module:

   ```bash
   go mod init github.com/skywall34/trip-tracker
   ```

3. **Run the Server**:
   Start the server using the following command:

   ```bash
   go run main.go
   ```

   By default, the server listens on port `3000`. If you want to use a different port, set the `PORT` environment variable:

   ```bash
   export PORT=4000
   go run main.go
   ```

4. **Access the API**:
   The API will be accessible at `http://localhost:<port>`. For example:
   - `GET /api/trips` - Fetch a list of trips.
   - `POST /api/trips` - Add a new trip.
   - `PUT /api/trips/edit?id=<id>` - Edit an existing trip.
   - `DELETE /api/trips/delete?id=<id>` - Delete a trip.

---

## Example API Requests

### Get All Trips

- **Endpoint**: `GET /api/trips`
- **Curl Command**:
  ```bash
  curl http://localhost:3000/api/trips
  ```

### Add a New Trip

- **Endpoint**: `POST /api/trips`
- **Curl Command**:
  ```bash
  curl -X POST http://localhost:3000/api/trips \
    -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
    -d '{
      "departure": "JFK",
      "arrival": "LHR",
      "departure_time": 1672531200,
      "arrival_time": 1672560000,
      "airline": "British Airways",
      "flight_number": "BA117"
    }'
  ```

### Edit an Existing Trip

- **Endpoint**: `PUT /api/trips/edit?id=1`
- **Curl Command**:
  ```bash
  curl -X PUT http://localhost:3000/api/trips/edit?id=1 \
    -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
    -d '{
      "departure": "JFK",
      "arrival": "CDG",
      "departure_time": 1672531200,
      "arrival_time": 1672598400,
      "airline": "Air France",
      "flight_number": "AF11"
    }'
  ```

### Delete a Trip

- **Endpoint**: `DELETE /api/trips/delete?id=1`
- **Curl Command**:
  ```bash
  curl -X DELETE http://localhost:3000/api/trips/delete?id=1
  ```

---

## Development Notes

- The backend currently stores trips in memory using a `map[int]Trip`.
- Changes to the data are not persistent; restarting the server will reset the trip data.
- For production use, consider integrating a database like PostgreSQL.

---

## Troubleshooting

### Common Issues

1. **Port Already in Use**:

   - Error: `listen tcp :3000: bind: address already in use`
   - Solution: Use a different port by setting the `PORT` environment variable:
     ```bash
     export PORT=4000
     go run main.go
     ```

2. **Invalid JSON Payload**:

   - Ensure the payload in `POST` or `PUT` requests is well-formed and includes all required fields.

3. **CSS Not Being Updated**

- Ensure that your browser cache isn't caching an old version of your output.css file

---

## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License. See the `LICENSE` file for details.

---

Commit message:

refactor(database): Clean code and schema.sql for setup

README.md, after:

# Trip Tracker Backend

GO Version: 1.23.5

This backend application is written in Go and provides API endpoints for managing trips. The backend uses the built-in `net/http` package for handling HTTP requests and maintains a map of trips in memory.

## Resources

We use the aviationstack API for real time flight/airport information [Check their site here](https://aviationstack.com)

[API Docs](https://aviationstack.com/documentation)

---

## Prerequisites

1. **Go Installed**: Ensure Go is installed on your system. You can download it from [here](https://golang.org/dl/).

   - Verify installation:
     ```bash
     go version
     ```

2. **Environment**: You can set an optional `PORT` environment variable to specify the port number on which the backend will run.

---

## Database

I use sqlite for this project

### Installation

Assuming you're working on an Ubuntu 22.04, but this process is similar for most OS cases.

```bash
sudo apt update
```

```bash
sudo apt install sqlite3
```

Verify the installation

```bash
sqlite3 --version
```

Creates the shell and new database. I like to put this under the database folder

```bash
sqlite3 database.db
```

You can also load the schema.sql, which is store under the database folder

```bash
sqlite3 database.db < database/schema.sql
```

## Installing Tailwind

To generate the Tailwind style sheet, we use the Tailwind binary. To get started with TailWind CSS, make sure you have the correct binary in the root directory. follow the instructions in this guide. Make sure you download the correct binary for your operating system. https://tailwindcss.com/blog/standalone-cli

Generating the output.css file

```bash
./tailwindcss -i ./static/css/input.css -o ./static/css/output.css --watch
```

Add the href to the templ files

```html
<head>
  <meta charset="UTF-8" />
  <meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1.0" />
  <title>My Trips</title>
  <script src="/static/js/htmx.min.js"></script>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="/static/css/output.css" />
</head>
```

## Installing Templ

https://templ.guide/

Generate the files via

```bash
templ generate
```

## Installing Air

Air is useful to autoload and track your go code

https://github.com/cosmtrek/air

Refere to [Here](https://github.com/air-verse/air) for reference

First, init air if not already doe

```bash
air init
```

That wil create the .air.toml file. Then just run the air command.

```bash
air
```

## HTMX Example

```html
<button hx-get="/trips" hx-target="#trip-list" hx-swap="innerHTML">
  Load Trips
</button>

<div id="trip-list">
  <ul>
    for _, trip := range trips {
    <li>{ trip.Airline }</li>
    }
  </ul>
</div>
```

## How to Run the Backend

1. **Clone the Repository**:

   ```bash
   git clone <repository_url>
   cd trip-tracker/backend
   ```

2. **Initialize Go Modules**:
   If the `go.mod` file is missing, initialize the Go module:

   ```bash
   go mod init github.com/skywall34/trip-tracker
   ```

3. **Run the Server**:
   Start the server using the following command:

   ```bash
   go run main.go
   ```

   By default, the server listens on port `3000`. If you want to use a different port, set the `PORT` environment variable:

   ```bash
   export PORT=4000
   go run main.go
   ```

4. **Access the API**:
   The API will be accessible at `http://localhost:<port>`. For example:
   - `GET /api/trips` - Fetch a list of trips.
   - `POST /api/trips` - Add a new trip.
   - `PUT /api/trips/edit?id=<id>` - Edit an existing trip.
   - `DELETE /api/trips/delete?id=<id>` - Delete a trip.

---

## Example API Requests

### Get All Trips

- **Endpoint**: `GET /api/trips`
- **Curl Command**:
  ```bash
  curl http://localhost:3000/api/trips
  ```

### Add a New Trip

- **Endpoint**: `POST /api/trips`
- **Curl Command**:
  ```bash
  curl -X POST http://localhost:3000/api/trips \
    -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
    -d '{
      "departure": "JFK",
      "arrival": "LHR",
      "departure_time": 1672531200,
      "arrival_time": 1672560000,
      "airline": "British Airways",
      "flight_number": "BA117"
    }'
  ```

### Edit an Existing Trip

- **Endpoint**: `PUT /api/trips/edit?id=1`
- **Curl Command**:
  ```bash
  curl -X PUT http://localhost:3000/api/trips/edit?id=1 \
    -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
    -d '{
      "departure": "JFK",
      "arrival": "CDG",
      "departure_time": 1672531200,
      "arrival_time": 1672598400,
      "airline": "Air France",
      "flight_number": "AF11"
    }'
  ```

### Delete a Trip

- **Endpoint**: `DELETE /api/trips/delete?id=1`
- **Curl Command**:
  ```bash
  curl -X DELETE http://localhost:3000/api/trips/delete?id=1
  ```

---

## Development Notes

- The backend currently stores trips in memory using a `map[int]Trip`.
- Changes to the data are not persistent; restarting the server will reset the trip data.
- For production use, consider integrating a database like PostgreSQL.

---

## Troubleshooting

### Common Issues

1. **Port Already in Use**:

   - Error: `listen tcp :3000: bind: address already in use`
   - Solution: Use a different port by setting the `PORT` environment variable:
     ```bash
     export PORT=4000
     go run main.go
     ```

2. **Invalid JSON Payload**:

   - Ensure the payload in `POST` or `PUT` requests is well-formed and includes all required fields.

3. **CSS Not Being Updated**

- Ensure that your browser cache isn't caching an old version of your output.css file

---

## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License. See the `LICENSE` file for details.

---
